====================================================
Isolate interactive code from the global environment
====================================================

As you do exploratory work in an interactive Python session (e.g. IPython in the
terminal, or JupyterLab or a similar web notebook interface), you inevitably
accumulate a big hairy blob of global state. Suddenly, a function you've written
starts misbehaving. You suspect it has inadvertently become entangled in all
that global state, accessing global variables it shouldn't, and you'd like to
disentangle it. Where to begin?

:func:`corpy.util.no_globals` to the rescue! It allows you to run a block of code
in a sanitized global environment (where the exact meaning of *sanitized* is
fairly customizable). When using an IPython kernel, load the ``corpy``
extension, so that you can use the `cell/line magic command
<https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/interactive/magics.html>`__ it
provides:

.. ipython::

   In [1]: %load_ext corpy

   In [2]: foo = 1

   In [3]: print(foo)

.. ipython::
   :okexcept:

   In [4]: %%no_globals
      ...: print(foo)

.. ipython::
   :okexcept:

   In [5]: %no_globals print(foo)

As you can see, :func:`~corpy.util.no_globals` temporarily hides the global
variable ``foo``. Why is this useful? When working interactively, you often end
up creating a lot of global variables while experimenting. Some of them might
even end up disappearing from the written record, as you edit and delete cells.
This (partially) invisible global state accumulates and can lead to hard to
debug problems, where typos pass silently, code mysteriously fails because
builtin functions have been overwritten, etc. See examples below.

.. note::

   In order to not be restricted to IPython interactive sessions, the examples
   below primarily use :func:`~corpy.util.no_globals` as a context manager, which
   works everywhere, including the vanilla Python REPL and scripts. In IPython
   though, the magic command shown above is much more convenient, and offers all
   of the same features. Run ``%no_globals?`` in IPython for details on how to
   use them.

   One option you should definitely know about is ``%no_globals -X``, which is
   equivalent to ``with no_globals(strict=False): ...`` (see :ref:`the end of the
   next section <non-strict>` for details on what that does).

Global variables can hide typos
===============================

For instance, say you're trying to sort numbers. You define a list of numbers
called ``numbers``, try the ``sorted`` function, which seems to work, so you
proceed to write your own wrapper function, ``sort_numbers``. (In real life, the
functionality would obviously be something more involved, to justify writing a
wrapper.)

.. code:: python

    >>> numbers = [0, 3, 1, 2, 4]
    >>> sorted(numbers)
    [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
    >>> #                ↓ typo!
    >>> def sort_numbers(numbrs):
    ...     return sorted(numbers)
    ...

But in doing so, whoops! You make a typo. You name the function's argument
``numbrs`` without an ``e``, but the variable name you access in the function's
body is ``numbers`` *with* an ``e``. Since there's no local variable called
``numbers`` in the function, it would normally fail with a ``NameError``. But
remember that we've previously defined a global with that same exact name as
part of our interactive experimentation prior to writing the function. So
instead of the typo leading to an error, the name will be resolved in the global
scope.

The tricky thing is, if you only test your function with your previously defined
``numbers`` variable, everything will seem to work fine -- by accident:

.. code:: python

    >>> sort_numbers(numbers)
    [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

The problem only reveals itself when using another list as input -- you get back
the sorted version of ``numbers`` again:

.. code:: python

    >>> sort_numbers([0, 2, 1])
    [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

Now, what :func:`corpy.util.no_globals` does is to provide a context manager
which runs a block of code in a sanitized global environment, as a way to
temporarily pretend that (most of) your interactive experimentation (a.k.a.
polluting the global environment) didn't happen. Running the same code under the
context manager yields the expected ``NameError``, which helpfully points to a
problem with our code:

.. code:: python

    >>> from corpy.util import no_globals
    >>> with no_globals():                   # doctest: +IGNORE_EXCEPTION_DETAIL
    ...     sort_numbers([0, 2, 1])
    ...
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File ..., line 2, in <module>
        sort_numbers([0, 2, 1])
      File ..., line 2, in sort_numbers
        return sorted(numbers)
    NameError: global 'numbers' exists but hidden by corpy.util.no_globals. Trying to access it may be a mistake? See: https://corpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/no_globals.html. Did you mean: 'numbrs'?

Which gives you a good hint what the problem might be, so you can now fix your
function and try again:

.. code:: python

    >>> #                ↓ typo fixed
    >>> def sort_numbers(numbers):
    ...     return sorted(numbers)
    ...
    >>> with no_globals():
    ...     sort_numbers([0, 2, 1])
    ...
    [0, 1, 2]

By default, ``no_globals`` tries to be "smart" about which globals to remove and
which to keep, e.g. it leaves functions alone, as you've probably noticed, since
we were able to call ``sort_numbers`` within the ``with`` block. If the defaults
don't suit you though, you can tweak its behavior by using blacklists or
whitelists and other options. Check out the documentation for
:func:`corpy.util.no_globals` for further details.

.. _non-strict:

One common case where you might want to change the defaults is to make
``no_globals`` a little bit more lenient, so that it allows all global variables
within the ``with`` block itself, and only starts pruning them inside function
calls. Typically, you'll want to use previously defined (global) variables to
test your functions under ``no_globals``, but by default, you can't, obviously,
because ``no_globals`` hides them:

.. code:: python

    >>> with no_globals():
    ...     sort_numbers(numbers)
    ...
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File ..., line 2, in <module>
        sort_numbers(numbers)
    NameError: global 'numbers' exists but hidden by corpy.util.no_globals. Trying to access it may be a mistake? See: https://corpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/no_globals.html

That's where the ``strict=False`` option comes in. In the code below, it allows
referring to the ``numbers`` global variable as part of the ``with`` block, and
only hides it during the function call.

.. code:: python

    >>> with no_globals(strict=False):
    ...     sort_numbers(numbers)
    ...
    [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

While the non-strict approach is convenient, it requires a slightly different
and more complicated strategy, which makes it somewhat slower. That's why it's
opt-in, even though it's very often what you want.

Breaking code by re-assigning built-in functions
================================================

Another type of problem that beginners tend to run into is that they
accidentally overwrite a built-in function. For instance, if you're learning
about sorting, what do you call a list you've just sorted? Well, ``sorted`` of
course!

.. code:: python

    >>> sorted = sorted(numbers)

Unfortunately, now you can't sort anymore -- you've pointed ``sorted`` to your
list, instead of the sorting function it points to by default.

.. code:: python

    >>> sorted(numbers)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File ..., line 1, in <module>
        sorted(numbers)
    TypeError: 'list' object is not callable

If this happens in the students' own code, they might realize what they broke
and how to fix it. However, if this ends up breaking example code provided *by
the teacher*, the student might not realize it's their fault -- after all, how
could they break code they didn't write?

This is why by default, ``no_globals`` restores any overwritten builtins, because
it assumes reassigning builtins is a mistake:

.. code:: python

    >>> with no_globals():
    ...     sorted
    ...
    <built-in function sorted>
    >>> sorted
    [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

.. note::

   If you accidentally overwrite a built-in function, you can get it back by
   importing it from the ``builtins`` module, e.g. ``from builtins import
   sorted``.
